Create style guide for FedRAMP OSCAL Constraints (#760)
GSA/fedramp-automation: src/validations/constraints/STYLE.md

| [FRR6](#frr6) | Constraints Have IDs with Lower Case Letters, Numbers, and Dashes | Required | ID |
| [FRR7](#frr7) | Constraints Have an Explicit Severity Level | Required | Structure; Metadata |
| [FRR8](#frr8) | Constraints with Critical Severity Level Used only for Runtime Failures | Required | Structure; Metadata |
| [FRR9](#frr9) | Expect Constraint Message Field Required | Required | Structure; Metadata |
| [FRR10](#frr10) | Constraint Has a Remark when Overly Complex | Recommended | Structure; Metadata |
| [FRR11](#frr11) | Constraint Message is Sentence in Active Voice | Recommended | Style |
| [FRR12](#frr12) | IETF BCP14 Keywords in Constraint Messages | Required | Style |
| [FRR13](#frr13) | Constraints Use Messages without Metaschema and OSCAL Jargon | Required | Style |
| [FRR14](#frr14) | Constraints Tests and Messages Have Single Item Focus | Recommended | Sequences; Style |
| [FRR15](#frr15) | Constraint Messages Have Single Item Hints |  Recommended | Sequences; Style |
| [FRR16](#frr16) | Constraints Formal Names Required | Required | Structure; Metadata |
| [FRR17](#frr17) | Limit Informational Constraint Usage | Recommended| Structure; Metadata |

> | [FRR17](#frr18) | Keep Let Bindings Adjacent to Their Constraints | Recommended| Structure; Sorting |

Reviewer: Just a minor edit to the ID here
```suggestion
| [FRR18](#frr18) | Keep Let Bindings Adjacent to Their Constraints | Recommended| Structure; Sorting |
```

Author: What's funny I had to fix that seem thing with FRR16 to prep for this update, as I missed it last week. And then I did it again. Fixed.

> # Style Guide for FedRAMP OSCAL Constraints

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking comment.  Just making the suggestion to address @brian-ruf comment

```suggestion
# Programming Style Guide for FedRAMP OSCAL Constraints
```

## Summary

> This document is to instruct FedRAMP developers and community members on mandatory or recommended style  for the structure, format, and organization of constraints. Each requirement will be given an identifier, guidance text, and examples that either do or do not conform to the best practices.

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking wording suggestion

```suggestion
This document is to instruct FedRAMP developers and community members on mandatory or recommended style for the structure, format, and organization of constraints. Each requirement will be given an identifier, guidance text, and examples that either do or do not conform to the best practices.  Following the guidance in this document will improve (external constraint) code readability and consistency, and make it easier to maintain.
```

## Requirements

### FCSR-1

ID: `fcsr-1`

> Formal Name: FedRAMP Prefers External Constraints
> 
> State: Recommended
> 
> Guidance: For FedRAMP OSCAL constraints, it is not recommended to define the constraints inline (i.e. the constraint definition is internal to a Metaschema module). The definition of all constraints SHOULD be in an external file or URL.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this required by default?

```suggestion
Formal Name: FedRAMP Requires External Constraints

State: Required

Guidance: FedRAMP OSCAL constraints MUST be in an external file or URL. OSCAL model in-line constraints should be avoided and only implemented by NIST for generalized, non-FedRAMP specific constraints. 
```

            <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 1">
                <prop namespace="https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0" name="help-url" value="https://automate.fedramp.gov/documentation/ssp/4-ssp-template-to-oscal-mapping/#data-center"/>
                <!-- The message for this constraint is written in passive voice. It does not conform to the developer guide. -->
                <message>An explicit country code must be defined here.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-11

ID: `fcsr-11`

Formal Name: FedRAMP Requires Constraints Use Messages IETF BCP14 Keywords

State: Required

Guidance: Developers MUST define a Metaschema constraint with a `message` sentence that conforms with IETF standards regarding capitalized requirement keywords per [BCP14](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/bcp14/). The sentence will use MUST," "MUST NOT," "REQUIRED," "SHALL," "SHALL NOT,", "SHOULD," "SHOULD NOT," "RECOMMENDED,"  "MAY," and "OPTIONAL" according to BCP14 requirements.

#### FCSR-11 Conformant Example

#### FCSR-11 Non-conformant Example

> ### FCSR-10
> 
> ID: `fcsr-10`
> 
> Formal Name: FedRAMP Recommends Constraints Use Messages with Sentences in Active Voice
> 
> State: Recommended
> 
> Guidance: Developers SHOULD define a Metaschema constraint with a `message` field with one sentence with active voice, not passive voice. The subject SHOULD be the document name or abbreviation for the OSCAL model in question. For general constraints (e.g. `metadata`; `back-matter/resources`), the sentence should begin with the subject as "FedRAMP documents require."
> 
> #### FCSR-11 Conformant Example
> 

Reviewer 2: These lines must have been accidentally pasted 

```suggestion
```

Author: Woops, I double check this soon.

Author: Fixed in Fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/c8618a964d9bdd02469116ec85941a131c8557e4.

#### FCSR-13 Conformant Example

Below is a conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata/location"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 1">
                <message>A FedRAMP SSP must define a location for a data center with an explicit country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FCSR-13 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata"/>
        <constraints>
            <!--
                This constraint queries a document higher in the document to analyze and report on a sequence, not an item. This is not conformant with the developer guide.
            -->

>             <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(location/address/country) eq count(location">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(location/address/country) eq count(location)">
```

Author: Woops, will also check!

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/c8618a964d9bdd02469116ec85941a131c8557e4.

                <message>A FedRAMP SSP needs data centers to indicate a country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-14

ID: `fcsr-14`

Formal Name: FedRAMP Recommends Constraints Messages for a Single Item of Sequence Data Provide Hints

State: Recommended

> Guidance: Developers SHOULD define a Metaschema constraint with a `message` fields provide contextual hints when it is for an individual item of a sequence (i.e. occurrences of a flag, field, or assembly have a `max-occurs` greater than 1) that conforms to an OSCAL model. If there is an identifier, name, or brief label (of five words or less) as applicable. Messages SHOULD NOT provide hints with machine-oriented data (i.e. fields or flags of [type UUID](https://pages.nist.gov/metaschema/specification/datatypes/#uuid)). Instead, message hints should deference machine-oriented data to provide human-oriented clues as recommended above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Guidance: Developers SHOULD define a Metaschema constraint with a `message` field that provides contextual hints when it is for an individual item of a sequence (i.e. occurrences of a flag, field, or assembly have a `max-occurs` greater than 1) that conforms to an OSCAL model. If there is an identifier, name, or brief label (of five words or less) as applicable. Messages SHOULD NOT provide hints with machine-oriented data (i.e. fields or flags of [type UUID](https://pages.nist.gov/metaschema/specification/datatypes/#uuid)). Instead, message hints should deference machine-oriented data to provide human-oriented clues as recommended above.
```

Author: Will integrate shortly.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/c8618a964d9bdd02469116ec85941a131c8557e4.

# Developer Style Guide for FedRAMP OSCAL Constraints

## Summary

This document is to instruct FedRAMP developers and community members on mandatory or recommended style for the structure, format, and organization of constraints. Each requirement will be given an identifier, guidance text, and examples that either do or do not conform to the best practices.  Following the guidance in this document will improve (external constraint) code readability and consistency, and make it easier to maintain.

## Requirements

| ID              | Formal Name             | Required or Recommended | Category    |
|-----------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------|

> | [FCSR-1](#fscr-1) | External Constraints    | Required | ID |

Reviewer 3: This is about OSCAL constraints.

```suggestion
| [FCSR-1](#fscr-1) | Separate OSCAL External Constraints  | Required | ID |
```

> | [FCSR-1](#fscr-1) | External Constraints    | Required | ID |

Reviewer 3: The link label is `FCSR-nn`, but the link href is `#fscr-nn`. In general the href's are broken, since they do not match the headings. This needs to be sorted out so the navigation works.
```suggestion
| [FCSR-1](#fcsr-1) | External Constraints    | Required | ID |
```

Author: Yes, sorry I just noticed this. I used a global regex search and replace and flipped them all. Also, having thought about other work, I want to switch the prefix anyway. Thanks for catching this!

> | [FCSR-2](#fscr-2) | Constraints Sorted by Metatapath Target from Least to Most Specific | Required| Metapath; Sorting |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [FCSR-2](#fscr-2) | Constraints Sorted by Metatapath Target from Least to Most Specific | Required | Metapath; Sorting |
```

> | [FCSR-3](#fscr-3) | Constraints in the Context Alphabetically by ID | Required | ID; Sorting |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [FCSR-3](#fscr-3) | Constraints in the Context  Sorted  Alphabetically by ID | Required | ID; Sorting |
```

| [FCSR-4](#fscr-4) | Constraints Have a Help URL Property | Required | Structure; Metadata |
| [FCSR-5](#fscr-5) | Constraints Have a Unique ID | Required | ID; Metadata |

> | [FCSR-6](#fscr-6) | Constraints Have IDs with Lower Cases Letters Numbers and Dashes | Required | ID |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [FCSR-6](#fscr-6) | Constraints Have IDs with Lower Case Letters, Numbers, and Dashes | Required | ID |
```

> | [FCSR-7](#fscr-7) | Constraints Have a Severity Level | Required | Structure; Metadata |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [FCSR-7](#fscr-7) | Constraints Have an Explicit Severity Level | Required | Structure; Metadata |
```

Author: Fixed but specific commit not recorded. Apologies.

> | [FCSR-8](#fscr-8) | Constraints with Critical Severity Level for Runtime Failures | Required | Structure; Metadata |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [FCSR-8](#fscr-8) | Constraints with Critical Severity Level Used only for Runtime Failures | Required | Structure; Metadata |
```

> | [FCSR-9](#fscr-9) | Constraint Message Field Required | Required | Structure; Metadata |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [FCSR-9](#fscr-9) | Expect Constraint Message Field Required | Required | Structure; Metadata |
```

> | [FCSR-10](#fscr-10) | Constraints Have Remarks for Requirements Overly Complex Descriptions | Recommended | Structure; Metadata |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [FCSR-10](#fscr-10) | Constraint Has a Remark when Overly Complex | Recommended | Structure; Metadata |
```

> | [FCSR-11](#fscr-11) | Constraints Message Sentences in Active Voice | Recommended | Style |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [FCSR-11](#fscr-11) | Constraint Message is Sentence in Active Voice | Recommended | Style |
```

| [FCSR-12](#fscr-12) | IETF BCP14 Keywords in Constraint Messages | Required | Style |
| [FCSR-13](#fscr-13) | FedRAMP Requires Constraints Use Messages without Metaschema and OSCAL Jargon | Required | Style |
| [FCSR-14](#fscr-14) | Constraints Tests and Messages Have Single Item Focus | Recommended | Sequences; Style |
| [FCSR-15](#fscr-15) | Constraint Messages Have Single Item Hints |  Recommended | Sequences; Style |
| [FCSR-16](#fscr-16) |  Constraints Formal Names Required | Required | Structure; Metadata |
| [FCSR-16](#fcsr-17) | Limit Informational Constraint Usage | Recommended| Structure; Metadata |

### FCSR-1

ID: `fcsr-1`

> Formal Name: External Constraints

Reviewer 3: This is really about OSCAL constraints.

```suggestion
Formal Name: Separate OSCAL External Constraints
```

  <import href="oscal_implementation-common_metaschema.xml"/>
  <define-assembly name="system-security-plan">
    <formal-name>System Security Plan (SSP)</formal-name>
    <description>A system security plan, such as those described in NIST SP 800-18.</description>
    <root-name>system-security-plan</root-name>
    <define-flag name="uuid" as-type="uuid" required="yes">
      <formal-name>System Security Plan Universally Unique Identifier</formal-name>
    </define-flag>
    <model><!-- truncated --></model>
    <!-- This constraint definition below is inline, within the module for its related module. -->
    <constraint>
      <index name="by-component-uuid" target="control-implementation/implemented-requirement//by-component|doc(system-implementation/leveraged-authorization/link[@rel='system-security-plan']/@href)/system-security-plan/control-implementation/implemented-requirement//by-component">
        <key-field target="@uuid"/>
      </index>
    </constraint>
    <!-- truncated -->
</METASCHEMA>    
```

### FCSR-2

ID: `fcsr-2`

Formal Name: Constraints Sorted by Metatapath Target from Least to Most Specific

State: Required

Categories: Metapath; Sorting

> Guidance: Developers MUST sort OSCAL constraint definitions in the file by `metapath/@target` from the most to least specific. In a `context`, the least specific `metapath/@target` is one with the path addressing some or all of the roots of an OSCAL model. More or most specific targets address specific nested fields, flags, or assemblies deeply embedded in the model as close to the location of the constraint's target for data in the instance of the model as possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Guidance: Developers MUST sort OSCAL constraint definitions in the file by `metapath/@target` from the most to least specific. In a `context`, the least specific `metapath/@target` is one with the path addressing some or all of the roots of an OSCAL model. More or most specific targets address specific nested fields, flags, or assemblies deeply embedded in the model as close to the location of the constraint's target for data in the instance of the model as possible.

This approach provides a predictable ordering for readers and maintainers of the constraint set. It is intended to allow a reader to quickly find the constraints for a given context and to know where to place new constraints based on the constraint's context.
```

            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>    
    <context>
        <!--
            The target(s)  of this context's metapath are more specific.
            They MUST come earlier in a document.
        -->        
        <metapath target="/catalog//control"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="prop-response-point-has-cardinality-one" target=".//part" test="count(prop[@ns='https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal' and @name='response-point']) &lt;= 1">
                <message>Duplicate response point at '{ path(.) }'.</message>
            </expect>
            <remarks>
                <p>This appears in FedRAMP profiles and resolved profile catalogs.</p>
                <p>For control statements, it signals to the CSP which statements require a response in the SSP.</p>
                <p>For control objectives, it signals to the assessor which control objectives must appear in the assessment results, which aligns with the FedRAMP test case workbook.</p>
             </remarks>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-3

ID: `fcsr-3`

> Formal Name: Constraints in the Context Alphabetically by ID

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Formal Name: Constraints in the Context Sorted Alphabetically by ID
```

Author: I added some errant spaces, but I fixed this a while ago and hadn't resolved this issue.

https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/commit/6187a3ac47ac1326d4b3c1a55c0b92baab2acbda

State: Required

Categories: ID; Sorting

> Guidance: Developers MUST sort OSCAL constraint definitions in a file for each context by each of their `@id`s alphabetically, from upper case and then lower case respectively.

Reviewer 3: Given `FCSR-2`, is this ordering intended to be within a given context?

```suggestion
Guidance: Within a given constraint file, developers MUST sort constraint definitions within a given context so that each constraint is ordered alphabetically by the constraint's `@id`, from upper case and then lower case respectively.
```

                <prop namespace="https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0" name="help-url" value="https://automate.fedramp.gov/documentation/ssp/4-ssp-template-to-oscal-mapping/#data-center"/>
                <message>Each data center address must contain a country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FCSR-4 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata/location"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 1">
                <!-- This constraint MUST have a help-url prop. It is missing and non-conformant. -->
                <message>Each data center address must contain a country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-5

ID: `fcsr-5`

Formal Name: Constraints Have a Unique ID

State: Required

Categories: ID; Metadata

> Guidance: Developers MUST define a Metaschema constraint with an `id` flag that is unique to all those FedRAMP maintains across all constraint documents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Guidance: Developers MUST define a Metaschema constraint with an `id` flag that is unique to all the constraints that FedRAMP maintains across all constraint documents.
```

    <context>
        <metapath target="/catalog//control"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="prop-response-point-has-cardinality-one" target=".//part" test="count(prop[@ns='https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal' and @name='response-point']) &lt;= 1">
                <message>Duplicate response point at '{ path(.) }'.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FCSR-5 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/catalog//control"/>
        <constraints>
            <!-- This constraint is missing an @id flag, it does not meet FedRAMP developer style requirements. -->
            <expect target=".//part" test="count(prop[@ns='https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal' and @name='response-point']) &lt;= 1">
                <message>Duplicate response point at '{ path(.) }'.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-6

ID: `fcsr-6`

> Formal Name: Constraints Have IDs with Lower Cases Letters Numbers and Dashes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Formal Name: Constraints Have IDs with Lower Case Letters, Numbers, and Dashes
```

Author: Fixed but I had not noted commit before, apologies.

                <message>A FedRAMP SSP must define locations for data centers that are explicitly in the United States.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FCSR-6 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata/location"/>
        <constraints>
            <!-- 
                This constraint's @id does not use lowercase letters, numbers, and dashes only.
                This example does not conform to the developer guide.
            -->
            <expect id="DataCenterUSOnly" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 'US'">
                <formal-name>Data Center Locations in the United States</formal-name>
                <message>A FedRAMP SSP must define locations for data centers that are explicitly in the United States.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-7

ID: `fcsr-7`

> Formal Name: Constraints Have a Severity Level

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Formal Name: Constraints Have an Explicit Severity Level
```

    <context>
        <metapath target="/catalog//control"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="duplicate-response-point" target=".//part" test="count(prop[@ns='https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal' and @name='response-point']) &lt;= 1" level="ERROR">
                <message>Duplicate response point at '{ path(.) }'.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FCSR-7 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/catalog//control"/>
        <constraints>
            <!-- This constraint is missing an @level flag, it does not meet FedRAMP developer style requirements. -->
            <expect target=".//part" test="count(prop[@ns='https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal' and @name='response-point']) &lt;= 1">
                <message>Duplicate response point at '{ path(.) }'.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-8

ID: `fcsr-8`

> Formal Name: Constraints with Critical Severity Level for Runtime Failures

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Formal Name: Constraints with Critical Severity Level Used only for Runtime Failures
```

            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FCSR-8 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/catalog//control"/>
        <constraints>
            <!-- This constraint defines a CRITICAL severity level for a violation that does not cause an irrecoverable error or undefined behavior. This example does not conform with the FedRAMP developer's guide. -->
            <expect target=".//part" test="count(prop[@ns='https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal' and @name='response-point']) &lt;= 1" level="CRITICAL">
                <message>Duplicate response point at '{ path(.) }'.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-9

ID: `fcsr-9`

> Formal Name: Constraint Message Field Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Formal Name: Expect Constraint Message Field Required
```

State: Required

Categories: Structure; Metadata

> Guidance: Developers MUST only define a Metaschema constraint with a `message` field with a description of the positive requirement (i.e. what an OSCAL document must define and encode for FedRAMP's use case; why it matters; and other relevant details technical leads and developer team, if applicable).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Guidance: Developers MUST only define an `expect`  Metaschema constraint with a `message` field with a description of the positive requirement (i.e. what an OSCAL document must define and encode for FedRAMP's use case; why it matters; and other relevant details technical leads and developer team, if applicable).
```

#### FCSR-9 Conformant Example

Below is a conformant example.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan"/>
        <constraints>

>             <matches id="ssp-needs-valid-control-source" target="./import-profile" test="@href" datatype="uri-reference" level="CRITICAL">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            <expect id="ssp-needs-valid-control-source" target="./import-profile" test="@href" level="CRITICAL">
```

Author: I had missed this last one, fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/commit/0d63b89d6ed3ce234767f2ad60d1f4b05911348a.

                <message>A FedRAMP SSP MUST define a valid URL to the catalog that identifies the controls' requirements it implements. This error indicates the referenced catalog or profile is invalid, so many constraints are unable to process. The resulting validations from constraint check are inaccurate, incomplete, or both.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FCSR-9 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan"/>
        <constraints>

>             <matches id="ssp-needs-valid-control-source" target="./import-profile" test="@href" datatype="uri-reference" level="CRITICAL">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            <expect id="ssp-needs-valid-control-source" target="./import-profile" test="@href" level="CRITICAL">
```

                <!-- This constraint does not provide a meaningful message for data violates the constraint. It is not conformant with the developer guide. -->
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-10

ID: `fcsr-10`

> Formal Name: Constraints Have Remarks for Requirements Overly Complex Descriptions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Formal Name: Constraint Has a Remark when Overly Complex
```

<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan"/>
        <constraints>
            <!-- This constraint has too long of an explanation of the positive requirement for a message. This example does not conform with the developer guide. -->
            <matches id="ssp-needs-valid-control-source" target="./import-profile" test="@href" datatype="uri-reference" level="CRITICAL">
                <message>A FedRAMP SSP MUST define a valid URL to the catalog that identifies the controls' requirements it implements. The control requirements a SSP must implement and support are defined in the profile or catalog referenced in b a URL to a file on a computer's filesystem or remote URL. More than other constraints, a valid profile URL is integral for processing of other constraints in this document. Users and intervening software developers should clearly mark that validation failed if this constraint is violated regardless of all others.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FCSR-11

ID: `fcsr-11`

> Formal Name: Constraints Message Sentences in Active Voice

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Formal Name: Constraint Message is Sentence in Active Voice
```

| [FRR9](#frr9) | Expect Constraint Message Field Required | Required | Structure; Metadata |
| [FRR10](#frr10) | Constraint Has a Remark when Overly Complex | Recommended | Structure; Metadata |
| [FRR11](#frr11) | Constraint Message is Sentence in Active Voice | Recommended | Style |
| [FRR12](#frr12) | IETF BCP14 Keywords in Constraint Messages | Required | Style |
| [FRR13](#frr13) | Constraints Use Messages without Metaschema and OSCAL Jargon | Required | Style |
| [FRR14](#frr14) | Constraints Tests and Messages Have Single Item Focus | Recommended | Sequences; Style |
| [FRR15](#frr15) | Constraint Messages Have Single Item Hints |  Recommended | Sequences; Style |
| [FRR16](#frr16) | Constraints Formal Names Required | Required | Structure; Metadata |
| [FRR16](#frr17) | Limit Informational Constraint Usage | Recommended| Structure; Metadata |

### FRR1

ID: `frr1`

Formal Name: Separate OSCAL External Constraints

State: Required

Categories: ID

Guidance: FedRAMP OSCAL constraints MUST be in an external file or URL. OSCAL model in-line constraints should be avoided and only implemented by NIST for generalized, non-FedRAMP specific constraints.

> **NOTE:** At this time, the FedRAMP Automation Team maintains a set of constraints for the core NIST-maintained OSCAL models, not specific to FedRAMP, in the the [`oscal-external-constraints.xml`](./oscal-external-constraints.xml) file. The team intends intends to upstream these changes to the NIST-maintained models and their supporting code base, as proposed in [usnistgov/OSCAL#2050)](https://github.com/usnistgov/OSCAL/issues/2050). Currently, FedRAMP developers implement externalized constraints in this separate file, as this guidance requires and is the only feasible interim solution. However, the test infrastructure purposely ignores this file and does not process its constraints for explicit continuous integration testing. This approach MAY change given the result of the proposal to NIST maintainers or other decisions by FedRAMP's technical leadership, but they are not explicitly within the scope of FedRAMP developer's constraint roadmap and they follow this guidance _only_ when reasonable. FedRAMP developers did not design or implement these constraints as a permanent collection in the constraints inventory.

Author: Very tardy, btu thanks, fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/79a77ef320f4fb8867989cc8bbdfbeb440233b95.

    <json-base-uri>http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal</json-base-uri>
    <!-- truncated -->
    <define-assembly name="back-matter">
        <formal-name>Back matter</formal-name>
        <description>A collection of resources that may be referenced from within the OSCAL document instance.</description>
        <model>
            <define-assembly name="resource" max-occurs="unbounded">
                <formal-name>Resource</formal-name>
                <!-- truncated -->
                <model>
                    <define-field name="title" as-type="markup-line">
                        <formal-name>Resource Title</formal-name>
                        <description>An optional name given to the resource, which may be used by a tool for display and navigation.</description>
                    </define-field>
                    <!-- truncated -->
```

#### FRR1 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example for FRR1.

```xml
<!-- 
    Below is a truncated example from the core NIST OSCAL constraints in v1.1.2.
    See URL below for full context:

    https://github.com/usnistgov/OSCAL/blob/v1.1.2/src/metaschema/oscal_ssp_metaschema.xml#L1044-L1049

>     All the definitions below are in the same file. This file is oscal_ssp_metaschema.xml.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/88120bcc274b9b0598b1012ed704020f31adc762.

  <import href="oscal_implementation-common_metaschema.xml"/>
  <define-assembly name="system-security-plan">
    <formal-name>System Security Plan (SSP)</formal-name>
    <description>A system security plan, such as those described in NIST SP 800-18.</description>
    <root-name>system-security-plan</root-name>
    <define-flag name="uuid" as-type="uuid" required="yes">
      <formal-name>System Security Plan Universally Unique Identifier</formal-name>
    </define-flag>
    <model><!-- truncated --></model>
    <!-- This constraint definition below is inline, within the module for its related module. -->
    <constraint>
      <index name="by-component-uuid" target="control-implementation/implemented-requirement//by-component|doc(system-implementation/leveraged-authorization/link[@rel='system-security-plan']/@href)/system-security-plan/control-implementation/implemented-requirement//by-component">
        <key-field target="@uuid"/>
      </index>
    </constraint>
    <!-- truncated -->
</METASCHEMA>    
```

### FRR2

ID: `frr2`

Formal Name: Constraints Sorted by Metatapath Target from Least to Most Specific

State: Required

Categories: Metapath; Sorting

> Guidance: Developers MUST sort OSCAL constraint definitions in the file by `metapath/@target` from the most to least specific. In a `context`, the least specific `metapath/@target` is one with the path addressing some or all of the roots of a model. More or most specific targets address specific nested fields, flags, or assemblies deeply embedded in the model as close to the location of the constraint's target for data in the instance of the model as possible.

Author: Lots of good feedback, thanks for on the call explanation, fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/06f7f63700c7c904f463a8f51d9639736999ce81.

                <p>For control statements, it signals to the CSP which statements require a response in the SSP.</p>
                <p>For control objectives, it signals to the assessor which control objectives must appear in the assessment results, which aligns with the FedRAMP test case workbook.</p>
             </remarks>
        </constraints>
    </context>
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata/location"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 1">
                <message>Each data center address must contain a country code.</message>
            </expect>
            <expect id="data-center-US" target="." test="address/country eq 'US'">
                <message>Each data center must have an address that is within the United States.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FRR2 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <!--

>             The target(s)  of this context's metapath are more specific.

Author: Thanks for the feedback, adjust in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/105e93c0d3e31d75e97abd46c50b3a86f0fadc19.

    </context>    
    <context>
        <!--
            The target(s)  of this context's metapath are more specific.
            They MUST come earlier in a document.
        -->        
        <metapath target="/catalog//control"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="prop-response-point-has-cardinality-one" target=".//part" test="count(prop[@ns='https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal' and @name='response-point']) &lt;= 1" level="WARNING">
                <message>Duplicate response point at '{ path(.) }'.</message>
            </expect>
            <remarks>
                <p>This appears in FedRAMP profiles and resolved profile catalogs.</p>
                <p>For control statements, it signals to the CSP which statements require a response in the SSP.</p>
                <p>For control objectives, it signals to the assessor which control objectives must appear in the assessment results, which aligns with the FedRAMP test case workbook.</p>
             </remarks>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FRR3

ID: `frr3`

Formal Name: Constraints in the Context  Sorted  Alphabetically by ID

State: Required

Categories: ID; Sorting

> Guidance: Within a given constraint file, developers MUST sort constraint definitions within a given context so that each constraint is ordered alphabetically by the constraint's `@id`, from upper case and then lower case respectively.

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/f3452e7e7d9c1a0330598e3f10c6e86c1f6d59cc.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata/location"/>
        <constraints>
            <!-- Constraints MUST be sorted alphabetically by @id, these are not.  -->
            <expect id="c" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 4" level="WARNING">
                <message>Example of sorting.</message>
            </expect>
            <expect id="A" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 1" level="WARNING">
                <message>Example of sorting.</message>
            </expect>
            <expect id="b" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 3" level="WARNING">
                <message>Example of sorting.</message>
            </expect>                      
            <expect id="a" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 2" level="WARNING">
                <message>Example of sorting.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FRR4

ID: `frr4`

Formal Name: Constraints Have a Help URL Property

State: Required

Categories: Structure; Metadata

> Guidance: Developers MUST define only one Metaschema constraint property with a namespace of `https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0`,  name `help-url`, and `value` with a URL to an official, meaningful, and specific explanation to the OSCAL syntax and semantics that motivate that OSCAL constraint definition in a file.

Author: That is a good point, I missed this specific feedback before.

> Guidance: Developers MUST define only one Metaschema constraint property with a namespace of `https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0`,  name `help-url`, and `value` with a URL to an official, meaningful, and specific explanation to the OSCAL syntax and semantics that motivate that OSCAL constraint definition in a file.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/commit/6fa3908d7c23ff25b15e20c4f2afd042658a8132.

                <prop namespace="https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0" name="help-url" value="https://automate.fedramp.gov/documentation/ssp/4-ssp-template-to-oscal-mapping/#data-center"/>
                <message>Each data center address must contain a country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FRR4 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata/location"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 1" level="WARNING">
                <!-- This constraint MUST have a help-url prop. It is missing and non-conformant. -->
                <message>Each data center address must contain a country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FRR5

ID: `frr5`

Formal Name: Constraints Have a Unique ID

State: Required

Categories: ID; Metadata

> Guidance: Developers MUST define a Metaschema constraint with an `id` flag that is unique to all the constraints that FedRAMP maintains across all constraint documents.

Author: Another good point I missed, addressed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/commit/842d9cdce07c20802af2b2fc1e36c2a339bd1321.

            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FRR8 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/catalog//control"/>
        <constraints>
            <!-- This constraint defines a CRITICAL severity level for a violation that does not cause an irrecoverable error or undefined behavior. This example does not conform with the FedRAMP developer's guide. -->
            <expect target=".//part" test="count(prop[@ns='https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal' and @name='response-point']) &lt;= 1" level="CRITICAL">
                <message>Duplicate response point at '{ path(.) }'.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FRR9

ID: `frr9`

Formal Name: Expect Constraint Message Field Required

State: Required

Categories: Structure; Metadata

> Guidance: Developers MUST only define an `expect`  Metaschema constraint with a `message` field with a description of the positive requirement (i.e. what an OSCAL document must define and encode for FedRAMP's use case; why it matters; and other relevant details technical leads and developer team, if applicable).

Author: Forgot to mark this one as resolved, fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/cde3f1e4208d6e59854fc0fb9ba63706e57a385d.

            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FRR9 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="ssp-needs-valid-control-source" target="./import-profile" test="@href" level="CRITICAL">
                <!-- This constraint does not provide a meaningful message for data violates the constraint. It is not conformant with the developer guide. -->
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FRR10

ID: `frr10`

Formal Name: Constraint Has a Remark when Overly Complex

State: Recommended

Categories: Structure; Metadata

> Guidance: Developers SHOULD only define a Metaschema constraint with a `remarks` field when the requirement is complex enough that a full explanation of the positive requirement exceeds a sentence of reasonable length conforming to all requirements in this guide.

Author: Adjusted in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/30b7d6b6c32d0e03dda3f7e5a1bad23801257b4c.

                <prop namespace="https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0" name="help-url" value="https://automate.fedramp.gov/documentation/ssp/4-ssp-template-to-oscal-mapping/#data-center"/>
                <message>A FedRAMP document MUST define a data center location with an explicit country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FRR13 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata/location"/>
        <constraints>
            <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 1" level="WARNING">
                <prop namespace="https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0" name="help-url" value="https://automate.fedramp.gov/documentation/ssp/4-ssp-template-to-oscal-mapping/#data-center"/>
                <!-- The message for this constraint is written with Metaschema and OSCAL jargon. It does not conform to the developer guide. -->

>                 <message>The value of this field in the address assembly within the abstract metadta module, with a cardinality of 0 to 1, must result with a value of 1 when evaluated by the Metapath function count.</message>

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/3432566805afa1b232c476b410938866e8086eb3.

                <message>A FedRAMP SSP must define a location for a data center with an explicit country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FRR14 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata"/>
        <constraints>
            <!--
                This constraint queries a document higher in the document to analyze and report on a sequence, not an item. This is not conformant with the developer guide.
            -->
            <expect id="data-center-country-code" target="." test="count(location/address/country) eq count(location)" level="WARNING">
                <message>A FedRAMP SSP needs data centers to indicate a country code.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FRR15

ID: `frr15`

Formal Name: Constraint Messages Have Single Item Hints

Categories: Sequences; Style

State: Recommended

> Guidance: Developers SHOULD define a Metaschema constraint with a `message` field that provides contextual hints when it is for an individual item of a sequence (i.e. occurrences of a flag, field, or assembly have a `max-occurs` greater than 1) that conforms to an OSCAL model. If there is an identifier, name, or brief label (of five words or less) as applicable. Messages SHOULD NOT provide hints with machine-oriented data (i.e. fields or flags of [type UUID](https://pages.nist.gov/metaschema/specification/datatypes/#uuid)). Instead, message hints should deference machine-oriented data to provide human-oriented clues as recommended above.

Author: Thanks, it was dereferenced, I missed this so many times! Fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/3432566805afa1b232c476b410938866e8086eb3.

                <message>A FedRAMP SSP must define a location for a data center with the country code US for the United States, not {if empty(.) then 'not an empty value' else string(.)}.</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

#### FRR15 Non-conformant Example

Below is a non-conformant example.

```xml
<metaschema-meta-constraints xmlns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/metaschema/1.0">
    <context>
        <metapath target="/system-security-plan/metadata/location"/>
        <constraints>
            <!-- This constraint does not provide a contextual hint when it can. It does not conform with the developer guide. -->
            <expect id="data-center-country-code-us" target="." test="count(address/country) eq 'US'" level="WARNING">
                <message>Bad country code, pick the right one next time, fool!</message>
            </expect>
        </constraints>
    </context>
</metaschema-meta-constraints>
```

### FRR16

ID: `frr16`

Formal Name: Constraints Formal Names Required

State: Required

Categories: Structure; Metadata

> Guidance: Developers MUST define a Metaschema constraint with a `formal-name` field that provides a name for the constraint to use in documentation and tool output.

Reviewer 4: If you are writing a constraint based on existing documentation, should you use the formal name it is given in said documentation? If so, put that here

Author: Hmmm, ok, I will consider this rec, but I am worried about those names if and when they exist because they are clunky (to me). It is why I do not lean into them often, like other parts of the Schematron constraints.

Reviewer 4: Okay then disregard :) Was just a thought

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/pull/760/commits/cde3f1e4208d6e59854fc0fb9ba63706e57a385d, thanks for your explanation, @kyhu65867!
